In this lesson we'll look at Different
ways to display the contents of files and
how to use the Nano editor.
You can use the cat command to
display the entire contents of a file.
The more command will allow you to browse
through a file or page through a file.
The less command is like more except
is has more features, less is more.
When using the commands more or less, use
the Space bar to advance to the next page.
Use the Enter key to advance one line and
type Q to quit viewing the file.
The commands are based on the VI editor,
which we'll be covering
later in this lesson.
By default head and
tail only display ten lines.
So if you wanted to see the last
15 lines of a file for example,
you could use tail -15
space the file name.
The cat command can be a fine way to
view files that have static content.
However, if you're trying to keep up with
changes that are being made to a file in
real time, cat's not your choice.
You should use tail -f
followed by the file name.
You would use this to look at files that
change often, for example, log files.
You may wanna start a program and
look at the program's log file
to see exactly what it's doing.
Again in this case use tail -f and
the file you want to follow.
Let's look at this file
with the cat command.
If we run head against that file, we
will see the top ten lines of that file.
If we only wanted to see the top
two lines, we could run -2.
And a tail command will display
the last ten lines in that file.
Let's say we only want to
look at the last line.
We could do tail -1.
And that's the last line of the file.
Let's run more against this file here.
We can see some information.
It's the first page of the file.
If you want to get to the next
page just hit the space bar.
Space bar again for another page.
If you wanna go down just
one line hit the Enter key.
That's one line.
Another line.
And to quit, you just type Q.
The less command is very similar.
Again, space bar goes down a page.
The Enter key, down one line,
and Q to quit.
Now this file is growing so
lets take a look at this.
We will use -f with tail
to follow the file.
As you can see,
the file is being written to and
the screen gets updated with that
information as the file grows.
To exit, just type Ctrl+C.
If you need to edit a file right now and
don't wanna spend any time learning
an obscure editor, you use Nano.
Nano is a clone of pico, so if for some
reason the Nano command isn't available,
try pico.
It's very easy to learn but
it's not as advanced as some of
the other editors like vi or emacs.
Let's edit this file in Nano.
Nano file.txt.
So when you start Nano you can
see the file's contents and
a list of commands at
the bottom of your screen.
The carrot symbol
represents a control key.
So if we look in the bottom
left hand corner.
Which means Ctrl+X to exit.
I'll do that now.
Ctrl+X and we are existed out of Nano.
So let's go back in.
Editing with nano is pretty easy.
Arrow keys work as you would expect.
Down, right, up, left.
If you want to save a file hit Ctrl+O and
hit Enter.
Let's make some modifications.
So again, just place your cursor wherever
you want to go and start typing there.
[SOUND]
And
Ctrl+X to exit.
And it says,
do you want to save your changes or not?
In this case, we'll say No.
[SOUND] And go back in again.
And another important thing to
point out is Ctrl+G, to get help.
And this will show you more
information about how to use Nano.
There are various commands that you can
use to display the contents of files
including cat, head, tail, more, and less.
The Nano editor may not be extremely
powerful but it is easy to use and
you can learn it in a very
short amount of time.